For September 28th, 2018

"Authentic Movement and Buddhism Awakening in the Present Moment" - Zoe Avstreih

As I progress and grow in my Software Engineering career, It’s becoming apparent to me that in order to be successful in this field, I would have to be in the best shape of my life physically and mentally. For the sake of time, we'll only explore the latter today.
    The biggest benefit from my writing class has been the pure ability to offload my thoughts
somewhere permanent where I don't have to store it inside my head anymore. This is a very important realization as I've been exploring the concept in Buddhism called "Choiceless Awareness", the capacity to be present and welcoming to whatever arises. What does it take to attain that status? The obvious answer to me would be to actively practice mindful meditation. But how could one go about doing it in a world where we are constantly bombarded with information? As a Software Engineer apprentice, at times I already feel overwhelmed with technical information I need to learn, retain and absorb. Then the challenge becomes about being good at switching contexts; being good at navigating the highly structured and logical world of computer programs, and switching it off when one goes back to the real world and all of its irrationalities. In all reality, simply being aware of that problem helps a lot as it increases one’s emotional intelligence.
My attitude going forward is how to better practice mindfulness and be totally aware of my environment, regardless of whether or not I’m in the real world or the digital realm. I’m still the same person. The only thing I have control over is my own body and my own mental state. By being present and aware, I’m no longer just an “innocent bystander” in my own life. To achieve so, I have to write down every single thought in my head (technical and non technical) to free my brain power for future effortless contemplations. But to maintain that state of mind will require deliberate practice and constant reminders of the actions that need to be taken. One of the practices which have been helping me the most has been to always be aware of my breathing. By watching my breathing I’m able to remind myself that I need to feed oxygen to my brain, like I need to feed food to my body in order to survive. The other side effect is that it brings calmness as well as the breathing slows down my heart rate and helps bring total awareness to the current moment I’m experiencing. It’s even more helpful in the context of Software Engineering as I need to be mentally present when writing code. One cannot simply just write mindless code and hope to develop craftsmanship in the field. One has to be almost aware of every single function, class, object or method, and be mentally present while making decisions on how to craft the piece software being developed.
I’m very aware that it’s an uphill battle to get to a permanent state of awareness, but the amazingly positive side effects, I feel,  are worth the efforts. With deliberate meditation and daily mindfulness exercises, one can achieve a level of internal peace which would help tackle any difficult social or professional situation. My goal is to incorporate intermittent self check ups throughout the day to bring back my awareness in order. The biggest one is a 20 minutes lunchtime meditation to be able to tackle the second part of my day as things usually increase in complexity. The only challenge I can foresee is consistency, but that’s a topic for another essay.
